Skip to content
About
Work with me
Terms & Conditions
Disclaimer
Privacy
The Wanderbug

ABOUT
AUSTRALIA
PARIS
NEW YORK CITY
GREECE
JAPAN
USA
ALL DESTINATIONS
SEARCH
california usa
CHARLESTON, CHICAGO, DESTINATION GUIDES, LOS ANGELES, MIAMI, NEW ORLEANS, SAN FRANCISCO, USA
8 Of The Best Places in the USA to Visit
The USA is one of the greatest travel destinations in the world, for the vast regional diversity contained in one country. From New York City to the Deep South, from Chicago’s skyscrapers to the coastlines of sunny California, to cross the USA is to experience it all. I lived in the USA for nearly two years, and have visited several times. In my opinion, the best places to visit in the USA are New York City, Charleston, Miami, and several places in California, including Los Angeles, San Francisco and Big Sur.

More Ideas: 10 Most Charming Small Towns in the USA
the wanderbug
Table of Contents
[Close]
1. New York City
2. Miami
3. Big Sur & The Pacific Coast Highway
4. Charleston
5. New Orleans
6. Los Angeles
7. Chicago
8. San Francisco
Other USA travel destinations I want to visit
Further Reading
1. New York City

No surprises here – I’ve spent more time in New York City than any other parts of the USA, and lived here for nearly two years. I really struggle to write about New York City without falling back on cliches – it’s somewhere that really does make you want to use all the superlatives in your vocabulary. It’s everything everyone has ever told you it is – fast paced, energetic, dirty, expensive, beautiful, opulent, gritty, creative – and more.

From New York City, there are also SO many great side trips! My favourites are to the Hudson Valley, the North Fork and The Hamptons.

Find the Best NYC Hotel Deals
new york city cherry blossom season
2. Miami

I was not expecting Miami to be one of my favourite places I’ve ever visited. Miami’s reputation for mega-clubs and trashy tourists sells the city short, and I left completely in love with this vibrant city. It lays on the charm pretty thick, with soft white sand and calm, clear warm waters at South Beach, beautifully-preserved art deco architecture along Ocean Drive, soulful Little Havana which preserves the culture and history of Cuban and Latin American immigrants so well, and the upbeat, creative energy of Wynwood, the city’s cutting edge arts district. There is so much to love about Miami, it’s somewhere I can see myself returning to again and again.

Pro tip: If, like me, you grew up or have lived in a very hot, humid climate and can handle the heat, make the most of Miami’s low season in July-August and enjoy South Beach all to yourself – not to mention affordable hotel rates.

Find the Miami Hotel Deals
Ocean Drive South Beach Miami
3. Big Sur & The Pacific Coast Highway

I fell head over heels for California when David and I took a road trip on the Pacific Coast Highway last year. Highlights included Big Sur, Monterey, quaint Carmel-by-the-sea, glam Santa Barbara and Malibu, quirky Danish-style town Solvang and gorgeous wineries in the Santa Maria Valley. And this was just in the stretch of coast between San Francisco and Los Angeles!

Find Big Sur Hotel Deals
coastline of big sur, pacific coast highway california
4. Charleston

It’s hard not to fall for Charleston’s southern charm. It’s not a destination that comes to mind first for most first-time visitors to the USA, but it’s the perfect introduction to The South, one of the most fascinating regions of the USA. Southern hospitality is the real deal – it practically oozes from every pore of these people!

I loved eating The South’s regional cuisine, between friendly homestyle cafes where they encourage strangers to share tables and get to know one another, to elegant restaurants with warm, knowledgeable service from people who were bursting with pride over their local dishes. It’s home to a gorgeous historic district which is the largest in the USA, the mimosas are stronger, the air actually smells sweeter and there’s candy stores on every other corner – what’s not to love?

Charleston has a dark history as part of the transatlantic slave trade, and was the largest slave trading port in America. Many of the beautiful mansions you’ll find in Charleston were built on the profits of slavery, and understanding the weight of this history is an important part of any visit.

Find Charleston Hotel Deals
Second Sunday Street Party Charleston USA
5. New Orleans

New Orleans is one of the most fabled cities in America, which is surprising given its relatively small size. A history of Spanish and French colonial influence combined with Creole & Cajun culture has left the city with it’s own unique brand of architecture, cuisine & music.

It’s the birthplace of jazz music and the cocktail, so it’s easy to see why so many Americans love the Big Easy. While it’s disappointing to see some tourists treating New Orleans like Disneyland for drunk adults, if you look past the tourist traps there is so much to love.

Find New Orleans Hotel Deals
Frenchmen Street New Orleans
6. Los Angeles

Los Angeles is the birthplace of movie magic, but there’s lots to live beyond the silver screen in this star-studded city. I spent three days in Los Angeles and was totally enchanted by a sunset from the Griffith Observatory (for both the views over LA and the architecture), an invigorating hike in Runyon Canyon amongst the dramatic rocky scenery of the LA hills and was completely mesmerised by the pearly blue waters at Santa Monica Beach, against a rugged mountainous backdrop.

I was also totally enthralled by the behind-the-scenes tour of Warner Brothers Studios, which helped me find a newfound respect for the craft (and magic) of filmmaking.

Find Los Angeles Hotel Deals
santa monica beach los angeles
7. Chicago

Chicago has captured my imagination for a long time, perched on the edge of ocean-like Lake Michigan and home to beautiful historic architecture. Chicago was my first taste of America’s Midwest, “America’s Heartland”.

Chicago is the third-largest city in the USA, and it walks the line between being emblematic of the Midwest (friendly people, quiet streets, a slow pace of life) while also being a cosmopolitan city (beautiful historic architecture, renowned public art and art institutions and a vibrant food & nightlife scene).

Chicago’s city centre is even more beautiful than I expected, and one of the highlights of my trip was photographing the views from the Riverwalk. The Chicago River is a vibrant shade of aqua, which is unexpected in the heart of such a large city. 

I loved the ornate and glorious Wrigley Building, the beautiful Tiffany Dome inside the Cultural Center and the moody magnificence of the neo-Gothic Tribune Tower.

I was also so impressed by the creativity of the restaurants and bars I visited, and how the hospitality scene gives San Francisco, Los Angeles and even New York a run for its money. 

I was a little surprised by how much the neighbourhoods I visited seemed to blend in to one another. I found that the city’s most hyped up neighbourhoods, Logan Square and Wicker Park, don’t lend themselves to exploring and wandering as much as neighbourhoods in other US cities have, so it’s definitely somewhere where you need to know what you’re looking for.

Find Chicago Hotel Deals
Downtown Chicago USA
8. San Francisco

Once famous for flower power, free love and beat poets, today San Francisco is better known for it’s eye-wateringly expensive real estate, tech bros and a farm-to-table food scene that inspired that rest of the country – and the world – to eat more local, seasonal produce. It’s a hard city to pin down because each neighbourhood can feel so markedly different from the last, it can be hard to find a common thread apart from the very steep streets. It’s definitely somewhere you need to explore by neighbourhood because you’ll find a different side to the city every few blocks.

Find San Francisco Hotel Deals
San Francisco
Other USA travel destinations I want to visit

I’m constantly torn between planning a trip to a city with a distinctive local character and one of the country’s many awe-inspiring national parks.

At the top of my list are Savannah, Nashville, Austin, Boston, Maui, the Grand Tetons, Yellowstone, Yosemite, Palm Springs, Zion National Park, Badlands National Park and Monument Valley.

Further Reading

New York City Travel Guide
Pacific Coast Highway Road Trip: Los Angeles, Big Sur & San Francisco


Genevieve Lauren
Hello! I’m an Australian travel blogger, living in Melbourne, Australia. I grew up in Brisbane, studied in Paris, lived in New York City and now live back in Australia, in Melbourne.

I love sharing specific and useful recommendations, itineraries and guides for the most beautiful things to see, do, experience & eat wherever I go.

My favourite travel destinations are Australia, New York City & surrounds, France, Greece & Japan, but I’m always excited to explore somewhere new!

The Wanderbug is reader supported. This site may contain links to affiliate websites, which means when you buy through links on this site I may receive a small affiliate commission at no cost to you. Thank you for your support!

You Might Also Like
Little Havana in Miami
Highlights & Itinerary: One Month in the USA & Canada
Most Beautiful Places in California
15 of The Best Places to Visit in California
Charleston SC
Falling for Southern Charm in Charleston
Save
Tweet
Share
0 SHARES
GENEVIEVE LAUREN
JULY 16, 2025
Share this:
CLICK TO SHARE ON PINTEREST (OPENS IN NEW WINDOW)CLICK TO SHARE ON FACEBOOK (OPENS IN NEW WINDOW)CLICK TO EMAIL A LINK TO A FRIEND (OPENS IN NEW WINDOW)CLICK TO SHARE ON TWITTER (OPENS IN NEW WINDOW)
12 thoughts on “8 Of The Best Places in the USA to Visit”

Pingback: 6 Charming Small Towns to Visit in the USA • The Wanderbug
Pingback: NYC Life: July 2019 • The Wanderbug
Pingback: NYC Life: December 2019 • The Wanderbug
Pingback: My Favourite Small Towns in the USA • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Chicago: First impressions of the Midwest • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Top 5 Travel Experiences 2015 • The Wanderbug
Pingback: The Battery: Charleston's Millionaire Mile • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Highlights from 2 Months in the USA • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Falling for Southern Charm in Charleston • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Highlights from 10 Days in New York City • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Golden City: 3 Days in San Francisco • The Wanderbug
Pingback: Exploring Miami's Little Havana • The Wanderbug
Tell me what you think! Please leave a comment below


This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.

Post navigation
PREVIOUS
Previous post:Where to Stay in Paris: 10 of the Best Areas to Stay for Visitors & Where to Avoid (2025)
NEXT
Next post:Highlights from 5 Days in Milos, Greece
The Wanderbug

As Seen On
8 Of The Best Places in the USA to Visit
7 of the Best Places in Japan to Visit in 2026
15 of The Best Restaurants in Melbourne
10 Best Charming Small Towns in the USA
SoHo NYC Neighbourhood Guide: Local's Guide (2025)
Proudly powered by WordPress  Theme: Canard by Automattic.
Social Share Buttons and Icons powered by Ultimatelysocial
0
SHARES
Save
Tweet
Share
DO NOT SELL OR SHARE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION